10 tips for emotional and mental wellbeing Online assessment and treatment for anxiety and depression. Anxiety, stress, worry, low mood and If you aren’t ready to begin treatment with us or with another Clinic, then we hope the following messages will help. These are depression are common experiences but things that thousands of our patients have told us have helped are distressing. The good news is that most them on their path to managing their symptoms. people can learn to manage their symptoms. Please do not hesitate to contact us if you have any Treatment involves gently confronting difficulties and habits that questions about the MindSpot Clinic: have been around for a while, sometimes decades. This requires Email: contact@mindspot.org.au courage and determination. Please be gentle with yourself as you Phone: 1800 61 44 34 learn to manage your symptoms and remember to recognise and celebrate each success. We hope the MindSpot Clinic can help Warm regards, you on your journey. The MindSpot Clinic Team 1. Have confidence that things can improve Anxiety, stress, worry and low mood are normal human emotions. However, if they happen too often, are severe or start to impact our lives, then it is important to act. The good news is that thousands of Australians get better with treatment, even people who have had symptoms for decades. 2. Treat yourself with respect Most people who experience anxiety, stress, worry, depression or low mood are also dealing with difficult situations in their lives. We know that anxiety and low mood can change the way we think about ourselves. Because of this most people find it helpful to remember to treat themselves like they would treat others – with respect, 4. Don’t let negative thoughts sabotage you tolerance and kindness. So, please be gentle and patient with your own efforts, encourage yourself and learn to be your own Thoughts like, “I can’t do this” and “I am not good coach and supporter. enough”, are distressing and stop people doing things that can help. We know that anxiety and low mood trigger these destructive thoughts. Such thoughts are also often unrealistic, biased and don’t reflect what we have achieved in the past or what we will achieve in the future. Remember, our thoughts are not always true or helpful. Challenge negative thoughts by asking yourself what a friend would say if you told them about those thoughts. 5. Do the things you enjoy and that are good for you 3. Keep yourself safe When things are tough we often stop doing the things we It is common for people to have thoughts of ending their own enjoy. This can mean we get less pleasure out of life, which life. If you feel at risk then please make a plan to stay safe, makes us feel worse. Please do something each day, which including talking to others about how you feel. If you use nonyou used to like doing and which will give you pleasure. It prescribed drugs, it is a good idea to try to stop or cut-down. A GP or another health professional can help you. Things can might be as simple as listening to a favourite song, going improve with time and effective treatment. When times are for a short walk or talking to an old friend. Get back into the tough or you are at risk, please take steps to stay safe. habit of having things to look forward to each day. www.mindspot.org.au The MindSpot® Clinic is funded 1 800 61 44 34 by the Australian Government MQ 01-014 MINDSPOT 2PP 10 THINGS 2018 V3.indd 1 20/05/18 7:20 PM

6. Talk to one person a day People sometimes find themselves isolated and lonely. Unfortunately, it can become harder to talk to people the less you do it. Make a point each day to greet a colleague, call a friend or ask someone about their day. Talking to others is a great way to feel connected and involved and gives a sense of belonging. Don’t wait for people to talk to you, rather make their day by talking to them. 9. Accept that recovery takes time and effort Symptoms don’t usually go away by themselves. Feeling better often involves making a conscious decision to change, and then making that change happen. This may require changing unhelpful habits and building healthy ones. This takes effort, courage and some time. People rarely feel better immediately. It is important that you understand that it may take two or more weeks of effort before you start to see improvements. Having support from a good therapist or a good friend can really help. 7. Tackle one thing at a time 10. Do the opposite of your symptoms We often feel overwhelmed by all the things we have to do and do not know where to start. A helpful hint is to write Symptoms of anxiety, stress, worry, low mood and down all the things we need to do. Then, pick an easy thing depression often lead us to do things that are helpful in and do it. Then, tick it off your list. Success helps to build the short-term, but not in the long term. This is why it is confidence and momentum to tackle the bigger things. And, important to learn to do the opposite of the symptoms. We when possible, ask a friend or someone else to help. People teach people in our courses to start to do the opposite of often want to help, but are waiting to be asked. their symptoms. Here are some examples: 8. Check your physical health 1. If you find yourself saying negative things about yourself, Our physical health affects our emotional wellbeing – often learn to ask whether that thought is true or helpful more than we know. These things can help: 2. If your symptoms make you want to stop doing things 1. Visit your GP to get a physical check-up that help your mood, then pick one thing you enjoy and do it each day 2. Plan to eat 3 healthy meals and drink plenty of water 3. If fear stops you from doing things, then make a plan to 3. Go for a 15 minute walk overcome the fear by using gradual and careful steps 4. Go to bed early that build your courage and confidence PLEASE NOTE: The MindSpot Clinic is not a crisis service. If you require urgent assistance please call Lifeline on 13 11 14, or in a emergency, call the emergency services on 000. Want to know more? Email: contact@mindspot.org.au Please don’t hesitate to contact us with questions: Phone: 1800 61 44 34 Our Partners www.mindspot.org.au The MindSpot® Clinic is funded 1 800 61 44 34 by the Australian Government © MindSpot 2018 V10 MQ 01-014 MINDSPOT 2PP 10 THINGS 2018 V3.indd 2 20/05/18 7:20 PM