Counselling and Psychological Services (CAPS) Grounding techniques Grounding techniques are useful for settling ourselves when we’re feeling overwhelmed. If you find yourself stuck with a strong emotion, these simple and powerful techniques take just a few minutes and can be practiced at any time. They can help you to feel anchored in the present and restore balance in your body and mind. Grounding skills can be divided into two specific approaches: Sensory Awareness and Cognitive Awareness Sensory Awareness grounding exercise are about Cognitive Awareness grounding exercise filling your awareness with the sensory experience Re-orient yourself in place and time by asking yourself some or all of these questions: − Keep your eyes open, look around the room, notice your surroundings, notice details. 1. Where am I? ng − Hold a pillow, stuffed animal or a ball. 2. What is today? i l l e − Place a cool cloth on your face, or hold 3. What is the date? s n ou something cool such as a can of soda. 4. What is the month? c / .au − Listen to soothing music 5. What is the year? u d e − Put your feet firmly on the ground. . 6. How old am I? y e ydn − FOCUS on someone’s voice or 7. What season is it? s a neutral conversation. − Name one good thing about yourself. A S O C I R Source: ibiblio.org/rcip//copingskills C

 Other activities you can try Practice these techniques while you’re feeling calm, so you’re ready to use them during times of stress. 5, 4, 3, 2, 1 Notice your breath Three items Look around the room and name Take a deep breath and as you Look around the room and five things you can see, then five exhale, imagine breathing out choose three items. Describe them things you can hear, then five things strongly through the soles of to yourself in detail, including the you can feel. Repeat the exercise by your feet. Feel the connection of colour, texture, shape, uses of the finding four new things, then three, your feet with the floor. Do this item and where you think it might two and one thing. three times. have originated. Naming categories Five senses Focus on sounds Choose a category (e.g. colours, Try to notice something with each Listen carefully and name all shapes, textures), then look around of your five senses: sight, sound, the sounds that you can hear the room and name all of the things smell, taste and touch. around you. you can see in that category. Cold water Connect with the chair Special item Have a few slow sips of cold water, Sit down and draw your attention to Keep a small item in your pocket feeling the sensation of the cold how your body connects with the (such as a stone) and hold the water in your mouth and notice the chair – the way that it supports your item. Bring your attention to the sensation as you swallow. weight, and the places where your sensation of the item in your hand, s ue body makes contact with it. including its weight and texture. q ni Counting h c e Count backwards from 20. t g n i d n u o r G A S O C I R C Counselling and Psychological Services (CAPS) Crisis contacts S6 +61 2 8627 8433 Level 5, Jane Foss Russell Building Ambulance/Fire/Police: 000 P A C caps.admin@sydney.edu.au Opening hours: 9am to 4.30pm, Lifeline (24 hours): 13 11 14 / 11 sydney.edu.au/counselling Monday to Friday Mental Health Access Line: 1800 011 511